The Organic Internet 
Part I – The Human Connection
by Alfredo López

Introduction – An Exercise
Before you read on, try this. Log on to the Internet.
Open a web browser and go to a page you've never visited before and click on the first link you see.
Read the page that opens and then click on the first link on that page. Do the same thing with the web page you're taken to.
Keep doing it for as long as you're interested.
It's probable that, within a click or two, you're reading words and looking at images from a person you don't know who could very well live in a place you've never seen.
If you do this exercise for an hour, you will probably visit websites from people in dozens of cities in this country and maybe several other countries.
In a few minutes you did something that, a decade ago, was humanly impossible and inconceivable for most of us. Using things now found in most American households – a computer, a phone line and some cables – you are able to communicate with an unprecedented number of people in ways that are deeper and more probing than ever before.
You can search the web for the next several years and not visit all the websites that exist. You can read innermost thoughts, reports on daily activities, ideas, shared information and life stories from more people than most of us would get to know in a lifetime. You can quickly develop a relationship with them that would take years to develop in the off-line world. You can see them through images on their websites and see the things they want to show you. You can write to them after a click on their email links. You can bookmark their site and actually make it your own regular destination.

The Organic Internet
￼￼You can experience similar interaction with libraries and schools and organizations and businesses and so much more than you come into contact with in your off-line life and, in a short time, this digital world becomes part of your real world. Tasks and activities you would normally do once in a while in real time turn into things you do with more frequency, more comprehensiveness and more effectiveness online.
In this world you've joined, many of the traditional separations between us disappear. Through the magic of hypertext links, any website can theoretically contain all other websites. You, as an individual, are related to all other individuals. Your activities as an individual are meshed with those of all others into a massive, uncontrolled and constantly-changing force that drives the Internet, defines it and changes it.
And all of that has changed your life in ways you probably seldom think about and may not even realize. The Internet is transparent, its influence on us stealthily seeping into the fabric of our lives – increasing its importance every time we log on and as we become more conversant and proficient in its use. We become reliant on it and defined by it without choosing to. We're caught up in this massive force quickly and without resistance.
Of course, this digital dimension is supported by something very real, concrete and even mundane. You're sending and receiving data through those phone lines or cables in small messages, called packets, from your computer to another computer that holds the information you seek, the sites you're looking for or the email account of the person you want to talk with.
That data uses a technology made up of complex sets of protocols which define how the computers must communicate and then transfer the data; infrastructure that directs the data you are sending or receiving to its target; and tools you use for email, web browsing and other Internet functions.
But you don't see any of that and probably seldom think about it. Instead, you're concentrating on the information you're getting and giving and the people who send it to you and receive it from you.
That is what's important to you and should be important to all who seek to understand and work with the Internet.
The Internet is the largest human network in history, comprised of an estimated 1.3 billion people worldwide who communicate with whoever they want, whenever they want, from wherever they are.

The Organic Internet
￼￼It changes fundamentally every second of every day as people log on and off and is growing in size daily. It has a culture and a history and a social structure. It's organic and only problems of a region's development or a government's interference limit it.
In fact, the Internet's technology has become so intertwined with the human experience that its very relationship to us has become organic; it has changed the role of technology in our lives.
It's uncontrolled, even out of control, and that's its real power. The traditional forms of control and repression used by governments and corporations have failed against the Internet, which either steamrolls over them or finds another way to deal with them. Of course, those forces are so intent on controlling the Internet that they're persistently developing more innovative ways to do it. And keeping the Internet out of their control is part of our movement's work.
To truly understand the Internet and to work effectively within it, we have to understand both the technology that drives it and the human network that uses it. That's not easy. In a society saturated with and stifled by alienation, our fetish with the props of our human drama too often clouds our ability to see and analyze what's really happening. We tend to see technology as physical things and this mistake makes it virtually impossible to understand technology and where it's going. Life has never been just the things we use and our future can never be envisioned based only on those things.
A telephone sitting idle on a desk isn't "mass telecommunications". An abandoned laboratory isn't "science". And wires and computers aren't the Internet. Exploring the Internet's implements in isolation will not, in the end, reveal much about the important questions:
Why has it grown so suddenly?
What role is it playing in our lives? What is its future and its real potential?
For social activists and organizers these questions are critically important. The progressive movement has been a significant part of the Internet from its start and continues to play a vital role in its development. We use the Internet as a prime communications device in our organizing and our campaigns.
But is the act of using it enough? What if the Internet is more than a technology or even a network? What if it is a social movement in and of itself? If we progressives are in the midst of a movement of over one billion people, can we really be satisfied with our current role?
9
The Organic Internet
￼￼And what if that movement is crucial to the future of humanity? Can we reasonably interact with it without a strategy, coordination or organization? What will it take to develop that strategy? How do we strategically work inside a movement whose umbilical cord is tied to its technology? Must we rethink how we view movements and organizing if we are to succeed?
Put simply, what do we have to do to organize the Organic Internet?
Technology: the Constant Presence
Much is made of the Internet's newness, its speed and efficiency and the relentless addition of new tools, protocols and devices. The whole experience can be overwhelming and intimidating. It's scary, and the popular view of the Internet, fostered by our mass media, encourages us to fear it, to alienate ourselves from its real workings, to retreat to the safety of the user-friendliness that sits on its surface.
People often say, "I don't know how it works. I just follow the directions and...it works."
There's nothing wrong with that in practice. You should usually follow directions and it usually does work! In fact, the goal of technologists who work on the Internet is to make it easier for us to use and to make sure it works as often as possible.
But for activists, there is a danger in that ease of use. When we see something working and don't understand how it works, we tend to mystify it. That kind of mystification has given rise to a popularly held, distorted view of what the Internet really is.
People often tend to see the Internet as antithetical to normal human interaction – as if we were being turned into some army of controlled robots.
That frightening vision is beautifully illustrated in the Matrix movie trilogy. That these brilliantly-portrayed and thematically-rich movies have remained so popular hints at their visceral attraction. They reflect the uninformed and distorted belief that technology can acquire a mind of its own and ultimately control us, thrusting us into a false world, the delightful scenery of which masks an existential prison.
In truth, there's nothing unnatural or non-human about the Internet. It's only the latest example of humanity's relationship with our environment, reflecting the same human interactions and relationships we have always used to survive. Its roots are the very roots of human civilization.
One way of looking at the roots of the Internet is to imagine a group of people sitting around a fire a long time ago.

The Organic Internet
￼￼These people spoke a language that had fewer words than ours. Language is, after all, the way we communicate our needs to others, and these people's needs were limited to their environment – its potential and its dangers – and how they were relating to it.
One of those people was playing with a piece of wood (probably a broken branch), rubbing it against a rock and watching as the stick transformed itself, losing slivers of wood and becoming sharper. As the transformation took place, the others began to pay attention. Their eyes widened and their minds began to work. They were different from the other species around them because those minds were not only able to see what was there but to imagine what could be there; not only to see the sharpened stick but to imagine what it could do.
Another in the circle became agitated and began making downward motions with his or her hand, pointing excitedly at the ground. The stick holder stopped and looked at the thinker and soon the stick in his or her hand was thrust forcefully into the ground.
And it stood there, erect, as they all sat and watched in awe.
Over the next days or weeks or months, others began talking and thinking about the stick, about what else it could do. Some began experimenting with its integration into their daily routine of survival. These were geniuses, visionaries whose remarkable minds understood survival not only as the adaptation to the environment but as the alteration of that environment.
Over time the stick with the sharp point became a tool in that environmental alteration: hunting, gathering, cutting, building, securing, and defending.
And the rocks' edges could be sharpened to make knives or dulled to make striking tools. With these tools, and others they developed, their world could be transformed into an environment of nurture and nutrition. Its dangers could be shut out by structures and gateways. Its potential could be exploited and expanded.
They had technology.
There are, of course, many theories about all this and all are equally speculative. I have no idea if what I've described ever happened this way or if it was the first foray into technology. No one really knows.
But we can be sure that technology's roots lie in the deep ground of human cooperation and collaboration, driven by the need to survive and improve lives. We can be sure that the stick sharpener got the idea watching someone else do something similar. We can be sure that, if the group hadn't been sitting there or living with that sharpener or sharing their own
11
The Organic Internet
￼￼experiences, imaginings and ideas with the sharpener, that stick would have been nothing more than a toy, a way to pass the time, an engrossing change one person experienced.
Technology is the collaborative act of humans using the environment to make tools to meet our needs.
As humans, our tendency is to collaborate; it's the way we survive. We have always done so and collaboration within our weak, small, slow and rather clumsy species has helped us to survive and, in fact, come to dominate the world.
Many other species cooperate; there are long lists of animals that form societies of all kinds, some of them pretty complex. But actual collaboration – the act of working together physically and intellectually, meshing ideas and configuring our ideas to incorporate the ideas of others – that's us.
We are collaboration's children and the Internet's technology is our collaboration's child.
Some people insist that the Internet isn't a function of human collaboration but rather an invention by a small group of scientists working with military support. In fact, the truth of the latter proves the former.
The Internet's technology developed during an Air Force-sponsored study and subsequent development program. But that's the technology and it's only the start. When you think about yourself, the assessment you make isn't based on what you were at the moment of conception or even the first months of your life; it's what you are now. What is important about the Internet isn't its initial life but its subsequent development.
It quickly became a kind of playground for technologists and more sophisticated users and their play attracted more and more people interested in nothing more than communication. In a historical blink of the eye, people all over the world were using it for email exchanges and information quests on the web and then developing their own presence on the web.
What's fascinating about the Internet's history is how, as more and more people began to use it, more and more began working on it collaboratively. And the drive of that collaboration over the next 20 years was always to massify it, to bring more and more people into it.
The question is: why? I think it's because the Internet is the most natural communications technology ever developed: the one that is closest to our most basic instincts and drives. It is inherently revolutionary and

The Organic Internet
￼￼incompatible with any social and economic system developed up to now. Not only is it helping us develop our world, but it is actually transforming human and social behavior in a fundamental way.
The Metaphor of the Closet: the Struggle Against Alienation
To understand the nature, popularity and importance of the Internet, it's critical to look not at the tools we use online but at what we do when we're using them.
If we picture our lives in contemporary society as unfolding in a physical space, we might use the metaphor of a closet.
It's dark, restrictive and isolated. The door is closed and no information of any value can get in. We can occasionally, momentarily, and with some difficulty, push open that door a crack but we only catch momentary glimpses of others doing the same. There is so much we want to know about them but there's so little time before the door shuts again.
In this society, our psyches, social interactions, routines, and thinking are pushed into so many small, dark closets.
And yet we all keep pushing the door open. In a society that discourages truly deep and intimate human relations, we figure out all kinds of ways to counteract the painful alienation of the closed closet: personal relationships, organizations, events, and ways of sharing thoughts, feelings and aspirations. Yet, as rich and fruitful as we courageously make these things, they are never enough. We want and need to relate to more and more people in an ever deeper way, to grasp greater and broader realities, to learn more about everything so we can make sense of what we're experiencing.
The global communications infrastructure provided by the Internet is a function of that struggle, and its rise was inevitable. If we didn't have this particular technology, we would have used another. We are ready and our world begs for it.
Ravaged by misuse and destructive development, our world increasingly fails to function as an environment we can survive and thrive in. As a growing consensus of scientists now makes clear, our world is quickly becoming a hostile place. Huge masses of ice melt and threaten us with the destructive power of the water they unleash. The air we must breathe is so contaminated that it stifles us. The always precarious balance of nature between animals, vegetation and us is upended. It's no longer a subject of scientific disagreement: we are at the brink of catastrophic environmental collapse and the only disagreement is on how fast it's approaching.

The Organic Internet
￼￼The world economy is more than ever a model of discrepancy and imbalance, as a very small percentage of people get richer and the majority get poorer and poorer, the percentage of humans who are starving grows faster than ever, and the ravages of disease and malnutrition wipe out entire populations.
And we fight wars in numbers that have never been seen before. The people of every region in the world are now involved in some armed conflict which takes lives, consumes badly-needed resources and destroys living places.
We have no confidence that our children will live out a natural life. We fear that the world will be unlivable within our lifetime. We have no confidence that we, as individuals, can survive day to day. We are in crisis and we suffer the scathing insecurity that flows with that crisis.
What's more, the people who govern much of this world drive us apart. They seek to isolate us, to convince us that we're alone and that we're individuals whose well-being is pit against that of all others. We aren't producers; we're consumers. We aren't part of humanity; we are citizens of one nation or people of one race or members of one even smaller group.
Facing those challenges, we fall back on the one instinctive urge that has driven us forward: we kick down the door to reach out to others.
In fact, at its roots, every communications technology we've developed has been aimed at opening the door. In the end, all have proven limited.
We can phone only those we know and we can't see them when we do. We watch television, listen to radio and consume all mass media filtered through the perceptions, experiences and agendas of a relatively small group of people. We learn, for sure, we grow, possibly, but we seldom emerge more powerful from interactions with those technologies. The glimpses are longer and more comprehensive but they are still, in the end, only glimpses and the closet door always snaps shut.
The Internet's technology offers us, for the first time, a form of communication whose potential is boundless because, unlike any previous communications technology, it's not just a technology; it's a social movement that uses a technology. In fact, the technology has developed so quickly compared to previous technologies because it's being used by a social movement and that movement moves forward, naturally, through collaboration.
Faced with alienation, disunity and disempowerment that has brought us to the brink of personal despair, human annihilation and the physical destruction of our world, we respond as we always have, as our ancestors of so long ago did. We come together to collaborate.

The Organic Internet
￼￼It's a well-established truth that the development of the Internet's technology has been an act of collaboration; everything about this technology is the product of countless people – technologists, or techies – working together, driven by their desire to make it easier for people to communicate.
But what's different about the Internet is that the collaboration isn't only by those developing the technology; it's a collaboration among those using it.
We use its tools collaboratively, learning from each other and often being forced to learn new things by those with whom we want to communicate. You remember your first use of email? Why did you start? Probably because someone you wanted to communicate with needed you to.
That process of mutual learning is what actually creates the Internet's technology and expands it. To illustrate: techies are users themselves. Their inspiration for new ideas and approaches comes from their own use of the technology and their interaction with the rest of the Internet's users. In these groups, they collaborate on the construction of the Internet's tools and protocols, often working with people they have never met face to face, each contributing part of the code being written; submitting that code and changing it based on everyone else's suggestions and evaluations; intensely working together to issue beta (or testing) versions; and facilitating reviews and evaluations by test users all over the world which then form the basis of improvement and changes until the code is ready for final use by the Internet and is released.
It is a model of collaborative work, often without any financial compensation, driven by a belief in the Internet, a need for its technology, or a fascination with its power and capability.
The expansion of the Internet is also a product of collaboration by its users. The Web, the central star in the Internet's galaxy, has been constantly expanding, not because web developers come up with ideas on their own, but because people who use the web, work with it, develop its sites and visit those sites are constantly pushing to expand its use and letting developers know what's needed through a huge network of newsgroups, message boards and email lists.
Simple one-page sites and message boards give rise to blogs. Personal websites give rise to "Internet Personal Presences" like MySpace or Yahoo 360. People sending blind copies of email to lists of contacts often turn to email lists. Technological limitations, which always discouraged us from fully using technology, now become guidelines for expanding its use.

The Organic Internet
￼￼This is the interaction between a technology and people who are empowered by it, confident to use it fully, and make it more powerful when its capabilities fall short. Developers are simply skilled users who are listening and noticing.
The Internet's collaborative experience is markedly different from other technologies, not only in what it allows us to do but how much about ourselves it allows us to reveal.
With this remarkable combination of graphics, text, links, sound, and video, we can not only open the closet door farther but we can show more of ourselves when we do. We share not only snippets of our thinking or feeling or experience; we can now share as much of our lives as we want.
And in sharing our lives with others, we begin to alter the definition of truth. No longer is truth what someone with communications power says it is. With the Internet, millions of people can simultaneously express their version of truth, based on those lives and experiences they are sharing.
News is no longer only what reporters are saying; it's often what those making the news are sharing about their experiences. Analysis of events and issues is no longer just the few comments (from "both" sides) encased in the expressed opinions of the analyst or flashed on the television screen during a news show. Now we are exposed to hundreds, even thousands of "sides", often closer to the situation being reported on and usually more accurate. In the process, we collaborate on the truth, exchanging opinions and information and sifting through what we are exposed to with the filter of our own experience.
Never before in human history has such a process been possible, and that is the key to the Internet's impact. We are empowered to massively collaborate to identify what is true and then to unite to do something about it.
The Internet is the largest social movement in human history, and it is becoming a movement that comprises all of humanity. For progressive activists, the implications are huge.
The Internet as a Movement
About 25 years ago, in a late-night conversation with some organizers from the Mid-West, I was asked to describe my "organizer's fantasy". I was still drinking back then and the combination of beer and wee hours can nurture adventures in speculation.

The Organic Internet
￼￼I answered that I'd want a huge mass movement made up of people with diverse skills and backgrounds and I'd want to be an integral part of it – not just something I would join after it was developed or something I would "intervene" into or work to support. Not the usual organizer's scenario, but a movement spawned by a community of which I was an integral daily part.
I remember calling it an organizer's dream, and I think it is.
That's a situation overflowing with potential. And, for progressive activists, that's the Internet.
From the beginning, the American Left has embraced the Internet. Some of the very first websites were made by progressives and the progressive movement has been communicating via message boards and bulletin board systems, some of which actually predate the rise of the World Wide Web. When I founded People Link as a progressive Internet provider in 1995, there were already thousands of progressive Internet activities (sites and lists and message boards) going on.
It's pretty simple to understand the Left's interest in the Internet. Blocked from virtually every other avenue of mass communications, we found one that didn't and couldn't block us. Rather it allowed us to say everything we wanted to a staggering number of people. We seized it and learned to use it, and we have used it very effectively.
Maybe that success and unprecedented freedom of expression was so intense an experience for us that we couldn't take our eyes off it. Something certainly blinded us because, as the large network that was the Internet transformed into something much larger, very different and potentially of another strategic dimension, the Left in this country didn't seem to notice.
In fact, much of the Left continues to stubbornly hold on to the idea that this isn't a movement at all. And when one raises that possibility, some very committed, intelligent and Internet-savvy people either nod with glassy eyes or reject the idea outright. How in the world could anyone call the Internet a movement?
Well, the real question is how in the world could anyone consider it anything else.
Movements rotate around issues and the Internet is a movement around one of humanity's most pressing issues: alienation, one of the primary obstacles to all social change. Not only is alienation one of the central gears in the machine of our oppression – it makes successful unity more difficult and lack of unity breeds continued oppression – but it is, in and of itself, a painful, relentless and harrowing oppression. So the struggle against it is among our most important struggles.

The Organic Internet
￼￼Part of the problem is that, while we're busy struggling around so many issues, we don't realize we're struggling against alienation. It's so pervasive and discreet as an oppression that it's tough to notice it and our struggle against it.
But all attempts at effective communication, mutual support, shared constructive thinking, and decent, contributive relationships are effectively struggles against alienation. Our movement engages in these practices every day in our work and in the interaction with other activists. In fact, much of the human race engages in that struggle all the time.
This daily, heroic struggle – the relentless pushing against the closet door – is now massified and empowered by the Internet, and this movement's attributes reflect the breadth and scope of that struggle.
It is a genuinely democratic medium, usable by and accessible to everyone with access to a computer and phone line and to the Internet's technology itself.
It is world-wide and reflective of the world's unbalanced development. As of 2005, Internet usage was equally distributed between North American (U.S. and Canada), Europe and Asia with participation in Asian countries growing fastest and Africa and Latin America lagging way behind.
Its development has been an experience in the kind of mass, human collaboration just described.
It has developed its own culture: a language, a set of behavioral rules and, of course, a technology.
It absorbs other communications vehicles, including many of the most important modes of popular culture like television, movies, music and radio, each of which is now available in some form on the Internet. In addition to being an increasingly central part of people's daily lives, the Internet democratizes the production and distribution of popular culture, since anyone on it can now produce and distribute their own art.
It has returned the relationship of people and technology to one of popular empowerment by constructing a dialectic of influence in which its users change its technology constantly as that technology, and its use by so many people, change their lives.
Email has changed the way we speak with each other. The spider and web crawler protocols have transformed the way we get our information and learn. The World Wide Web has redefined how we present ourselves and see others. At the same time, each of these protocols change constantly with upgrades, improvements and alterations based on the expressed experience of the mass of people who use them.

The Organic Internet
￼￼This cycle of expressed need, tool development, impact on daily lives and tool refinement is as old as the human race. It is only very recently that much of the power over tool development has been largely removed from the hands of the mass of humanity. The Internet has reversed that alienating trend. The influence users have on tool design and development, the interactive and often intense way users and developers communicate about these tools, the fact that developers are actually users themselves and often begin developing these tools because they themselves need them – all these factors have never been present as deeply, routinely and massively with any other technology as they are with the Internet.
It has turned communication into an act of social resistance.
The alienation and separation fostered by our society continues to deepen due to the increasing atomization in our culture and the encouragement of the powerful. In ways that are both overt and subtle, we are discouraged from reaching out to each other on any but the most limited level.
The Internet is humanity's successful attempt to break through those barriers and, in this sense, participation in the Internet is an act of resistance against the powerful forces blocking profound, mass communication. Nothing else can explain the constant efforts the Internet makes to resist limitation and to find alternative ways of continuing and growing in the face of constant attempts to limit and misdirect it.
Even if someone found a way to shut down the Internet's current technology, the experience of communication so many people have had would result in the development of an alternative technology for the same purpose.
Independent of governments, corporations or other controlling powers, the people of the world are talking to each other in ways they haven't ever been able to before. That can't be stopped.
And finally, it grows like a movement. No matter what the commercial Internet does with its marketing, customer development and product releases, the Internet grows in one basic way: people who are experienced in it talk to others about it and help them become part of it. If asked about their own experience in getting on the Internet most people, I think, will remember somebody they knew and trusted telling them what to do.
As with any movement or campaign, the Internet's growth doesn't just happen; that growth is organized. It recruits. It sets up ways for new people to join it and encourages their participation. It arranges that participation and structures it.

The Organic Internet
￼￼Certainly understanding the Internet as a movement shouldn't discourage us from doing what we've always done with it: our "political work". But an understanding of its character as a movement alters how we define that political work. Not only does the Internet enhance our traditionally defined political work, but being part of the Internet is, in and of itself, political work.
The communication of progressive thinking on the Internet is no different than offering progressive ideas in a union meeting or a conference on the environment. Offering and developing technology can be as powerful as building a demonstration or organizing an action. In fact, the Internet expands the options we have for valuable issues and political work and it forces us to rearrange and re-prioritize.
We are today part of a larger movement around an issue that involves people of many political perspectives. We work in that movement, contributing to its struggles while logically injecting our own opinions and aspirations into its growing discourse.
When you log on, you are engaging in a political act: combating alienation through the mere act of communicating, enhancing the struggle against alienation by enhancing your use (and that of others) of the Internet's technology, and taking leadership by advancing your ideas about it – and the world.
So now we have a movement and we're a part of it. What do we do?
Part II – Organizing the Organic Internet
Introduction: The Activists' Hesitations
Many progressives are reluctant to view the Internet as a movement. That reluctance is most commonly expressed by two arguments that could be called "the activist's hesitations".
The first goes like this:
Internet users don't view themselves as a movement, don't act in a coordinated fashion, are all over the place politically (including a very active neo-fascist segment) and, in fact, often engage in activities that are reactionary and socially harmful.
How is that a movement and, even if we view it that way, why should we spend our precious time organizing it?
The moment we really examine this statement, it evaporates.

The Organic Internet
￼￼People who are part of movements frequently don't see themselves that way. It's not required. All that's required is that people participate in it for the reasons they deem appropriate. It's either a movement or not, regardless of what its members call it.
The idea that Internet users don't act in a coordinated fashion is patently absurd. The whole concept of the Internet involves coordinated activity.
Finally, movements aren't defined by the politics of their participants, but by the actions that unite them in this movement. In fact, it's often the case that progressive actions uniting a movement can have, in the short term, very non-progressive results.
No example better illustrates this than the U.S. labor movement. Clearly, not every labor movement member is progressive politically (and, by the way, many don't consider themselves part of any movement). The movement itself has often been embarrassingly reactionary on many issues. But progressives have always viewed that movement's unified activity – the struggle for better wages and working conditions – as the reason why the movement is worth our attention and effort. That struggle, we have always felt, is inherently progressive.
And that's true even when the conditions of our society or the strategies of the capitalist class end up making successes in that struggle harmful to others. For example, when capitalism meets our wage and conditions demands by cutting non-union workers' salaries and making their conditions more hellish, progressive unionists continue to fight for the wages and better conditions while fighting for union policies that protect those non- union workers as much as possible. In other words, they push for a progressive approach within the movement.
The struggle against alienation, the Internet's main thrust, is progressive even when a reactionary is engaging in it and in a society where relationships and psyches are distorted. It's not surprising that the Internet would harbor content that is sometimes pornographic, encouraging of a distorted self-image, or historically and culturally jaded. It reflects the people who make it up. Our job as activists is to work with those people, provide alternative visions and push for a progressive approach.
But that job is easier said than done because the character of the Internet changes things dramatically. This unique character gives rise to the second "hesitation":
Internet work is fine, but it can't substitute for real "face to face" organizing.

The Organic Internet
￼￼What's interesting about the argument isn't its truth or falsity but that it is posed at all. In my experience, most of the people who express this hesitation don't use the Internet very much for their work or anything else. That's not a condemnation, merely an observation. But it's significant because for those who use the Internet, the supposed issue doesn't exist.
Very few activists who work with the Internet politically have abandoned face to face organization, and some say that their "real life" work has, in fact, been enhanced and broadened by their Internet work. Stands to reason: the more people you meet online, the more you're going to meet off- line. The Internet expands the available universe of personal contacts.
Not to say the concern is entirely made up. The Internet experience, if allowed to control our lives, can be isolating and addictively alienating. We are, after all, sitting in front of a computer communicating with people we can't see.
For activists, the problem is even more acute. The Left, with its constant stream of demonstrations and conferences, is not going to transform itself into a network of individuals who don't see each other – not very soon, anyway. It may appear that the two experiences are contradictory. They're not at all.
There is nothing innately alienating about the Internet. It's just communication. What's alienating is that you access the Internet in front of a computer, and a computer is physically too big to allow its entry into a large social space. In short, this "isolation" is less a function of the design of the Internet than it is the design of the computer.
Suppose the computer were small enough to carry in your pocket. Suppose all you had to do to log on was to push a button. Suppose your voice were all you needed to communicate digitally. No more keyboard, modem, or computer (as we know it).
What if every conversation between you and another, or a small group of others, could be turned into an international conversation, or if your discussions could be enriched by quick research without moving one step? What would demonstrations, conferences or other mass events be like?
What if, using the combination of Internet and video technology, we could actually be present during a war, or have a class of youngsters join another class on the other side of the world, or have a house meeting on some issue with households in several other countries?

The Organic Internet
￼￼Those scenarios and the potential they bring into relief are impossible to fathom. Our imagination about what's possible is limited by what is, and in our step-by-step speculation, it's difficult to imagine a world of digital/"real world" marriage.
Of course, the powers that be won't take us there. No corporate power is going to encourage the development of technology and protocols that allow for such open human communication. It would constitute an act of suicide on their part.
What's more, such advanced technology can be used to massify disinformation and confusion.
We, as a movement, have to develop the tools and protocols that can realize this potential, expand it and encourage its constructive use. We have to make it a reality because that, in the end, is our job.
Our hesitations are groundless. We have to take on the problem of organizing the Internet right now.
Different Types of Issues – Different Approaches to Organizing
In the progressive movement, we organize around issues. That's been the tradition in this country, and it's what's always worked for us. We define those issues by observing our lives and the places where pain and difficulty reside in those lives. Then we analyze what's wrong, why it's wrong, and what should be done about it. Then we help organize people to struggle for that cure.
The Internet doesn't change how we get our organizing cues from life, but it is changing life. That means that organizing the Organic Internet is going to require a major shift in the way we think about issues and organizing.
Lately there has been enormous discussion of some "Internet issues" involving access and freedom of expression. There has been some attempt to organize around these important issues. Some of us who understand the concerns are throwing ourselves into the effort and, in most cases, emerging frustrated.
Most of the Internet's users aren't interested in the issues we've been raising. This fact puzzles and confuses organizers. Why, given so much at stake, are so many people not getting it?
Maybe the problem isn't that they aren't getting it, but that we don't get it. Maybe the users of the Internet have defined other issues and are, in their own way, pursuing them. We progressives just don't see it happening.

The Organic Internet
￼￼Because the Internet is a technology-dependent movement, its primary issues are going to arise within the context of technology, and defining those issue areas is our first major challenge.
Here's how I would define some of them.
The Misdirection of Our Thinking and the Denial of Our Lives
Put another way, this is the struggle for access to free expression.
There are many countries on earth where people do, in fact, have legally guaranteed rights to freedom of expression. For most people, it's proven to be an empty tool; the stated purpose of that freedom, to allow us to influence others in our society, has been constantly frustrated. We can talk all we want, but our ability to actually reach people with our words and ideas is curtailed by the morass of cost, regulation and classist, racist and sexist filtering that makes it next to impossible to reach a massive audience with alternative thinking and information.
The Internet's technology changes all that; it is now possible to realize the social and political potential of freedom of expression.
Up to now, communications technologies have profoundly influenced popular ideology, as much analysis of television, movies, and radio consistently point out. But this influence is exerted primarily through the content communicated over these technologies. The shape of the technology doesn't change much.
The television is still a television and its fare is delivered in half hour or hour segments structured to allow for commercial advertising. It's been that way for its entire history, and the changes that have occurred (in cable TV, for example) are minor. The process is still the same: you sit down, you turn it on and it talks to you.
This same is true of radios and movies.
The Internet creates an entirely different relationship between us and technology. We have to be active. Unless we do something active, the content doesn't reach us. In fact, the real power of the Internet – that everyone can, for the first time in history, create his or her own content – expands that active role. And so the way we act and the tools we use to act become centrally important to the entire experience.
Those tools, and the technology of which they are part, influence the content of the Internet and direct how we are going to use it.
There's no better illustration of this than the MySpace phenomenon.

The Organic Internet
￼￼Using a simple, website-based formula combining already existing Internet protocols and tools, MySpace makes it easy for anyone to have a presence on the Internet and develop on-line networks of "friends," exchanging with them profiles of daily life, thoughts and feelings.
While this was always possible on the World Wide Web, MySpace made it easier for people to create a web presence for themselves without any knowledge of web design and management, and then tie that presence to others, exchanging media of virtually every variety. No real expertise was needed.
And suddenly young people, including large numbers of young people of color, were making their Internet presence felt. While that population had begun to grow in chat rooms (particularly on AOL) and among visitors to many websites, the act of creating web content had, up to then, been inaccessible to them.
In fact, this was an essential component of the "digital divide" argument made about the Internet, casting the problem as a kind of cyber-apartheid. But the problem wasn't color of skin or age or even class; the problem was access to a tool that young people could use to do what they wanted.
People want to meet other people and young people are no exception. They want to express themselves, exchange popular culture (like music and videos), they want to dabble in the all-too-taboo activities like sex. They want to communicate in a world in which they are respected and appreciated.
Constricted by their own isolation, pained by the need to reach out, challenged by the limitations of their geography and seething with a desire for intimacy and socializing, millions of people (a large percentage of whom are teenagers and young adults) have made MySpace the largest and fastest growing site in history. As of Sept. 8, 2005 106 million users had registered on MySpace and the system grows at an estimated 230,000 registrants a day. There is, at the time of this writing, no sign of slow-down.
MySpace temporarily satisfies those painful needs, but in the end, nothing changes. As is obvious from even a cursory review of MySpace blogs, those who use it continue to feel alienated, unsure of their future, oppressed by society's punishing pressures, and insecure about virtually every aspect of their young lives. While it allows a fuller expression of a life, MySpace doesn't change it.
25
The Organic Internet
￼￼And that's because, in the end, MySpace users are still alone. The tool itself, while encouraging communication between individuals, is structured to encourage individual expression, only serving to deepen the confusion and isolation. You can do a lot on MySpace, but the tools won't allow you to go beyond your individual life.
One of the obstacles to developing movements of human liberation is the persistent belief, drilled into us, that our lives aren't important or unique, that they lack any lessons others can benefit from. Effectively, our stories – rich in their portraits of human oppression and proof of the human ability to survive and move forward – remain untold, unshared, and unused.
We are taught that success in life is based on individual action and, battered by that ideology, we ignore the obvious: that it's through cooperation, reliance on others, building networks, and tapping our relationships that we survive, and it is only through that approach that we, as a human race, can progress. That story is vitally important for the rest of humanity to hear.
The way MySpace is built and designed makes such reflection and exploration virtually impossible. With an interface that is almost obsessive with the individual's life and an array of connections that relegate "friends" to an individual interaction, MySpace pages are completely devoid of any group or collective experience, and there is no obvious way to reflect such an experience.
This approach isn't driven by a conscious plan. Our society is saturated with the ideology of individualism, the best protection any capitalist society has. So we naturally tend to think that way. The problem isn't that someone is making tools based on individualism; it's that few are making tools to contradict or broaden that experience.
But it's vital for progressive people to view development of Internet technology as our challenge and not satisfy ourselves with using whatever tools are available at the moment. Someone is constructing those tools. Someone is guiding the Internet in particular directions. Someone realizes that the Internet's content is partly governed by the tools it uses. At this point, that someone isn't us, and it doesn't take much thinking to figure out who it is.
Either we take up the challenge or we lose the Internet.
The Access Issue
For the Social Justice movement, the primary Internet issue has always been access. Here the question is "access to what?"

The Organic Internet
￼￼For some time, social justice activists were fond of referring to "the digital divide": a term that described the lack of access to the technology that socially disenfranchised communities face. Activists variously approached that problem as either a reason to not rely on the Internet as a major organizing tool or to focus primarily on access as the issue.
In the developed countries, the issue quickly disappeared. The cure – getting people on the Internet – was easily delivered by capitalism as it sought to use the technology for marketing and to mold consciousness and culture. We didn't have to fight for it at all! While access remains a major issue for many parts of the world, the lesson we can learn from our experience is that this isn't the way to look at the problem of access.
Until the launching of MySpace, people of color and working people in this country were mainly consumers of Internet information. The attempts by communities of color to use the technology (e.g. The Black World Today) were, while earnest and rich in potential, controlled by groups of highly educated and highly skilled professionals. "Regular people" simply couldn't navigate the complicated and difficult tools necessary to do websites or even contribute to them.
That MySpace is the first vehicle that allows that kind of creative contribution is a reason for celebration but, as we just mentioned, it doesn't answer the Internet's real needs.
The critical issue of access isn't access to the technology, but access to power over how that technology is developed and used.
We are accustomed to viewing the development of technology as the work of highly-trained scientists, educated in specific disciplines, funded by large corporations, universities or foundations. They toil daily in a pristine lab setting, experimenting and testing until their product is ready for launch, and then it is introduced to the marketplace.
The Internet doesn't work that way. Internet techies arise from the Internet movement itself and never stop being users as they develop the technology. Effectively, they are the Internet's equivalent of grassroots leaders. As they develop the technology for the Internet, they exercise enormous power over the technology's function and, by extension, its content.
It is here that one of the Internet's greatest strengths feeds one of its major problems. For the most part, techies are white males, and since Internet technology is developed collaboratively by groups of technologists, the grouping follows social norms. In a society where racism and sexism are expressed in a kind of social segregation, non-whites, women and poor people are effectively often excluded from these groups. That the exclusion is mainly unconscious doesn't erase it.

The Organic Internet
￼￼The Internet is run by white men, and that demographic molds the content that is prevalent, dictates the way the tools used to produce that content are designed, and defines the needs that determine how those tools are developed. Until that changes, the problem of ideology mentioned above cannot be resolved.
Repression of the Internet
While the progressive movement hasn't completely understood the potential of the Internet as a social movement, other powerful forces in this country, particularly its corporations and many government agencies, have come to implicitly understand the potential threat it represents.
The Internet is organized and grows by its own form of organizing, but its true power is that it is uncontrolled and uncontrollable. That's the fulcrum of its democratic character. Historically, uncontrollable situations have sooner or later resulted in major social upheaval, and this isn't what governments and the capitalist class have in mind for the world.
As a result, the Internet is now an arena of an intense struggle between those who would control and narrow it and those who would set it free. This struggle saturates every advance and choice the Internet makes about its future, no matter how small that might be. Either the Internet gets more free or more repressive. There's no middle ground.
While this battle is fought in many areas, including the content and protocol issues we've mentioned above, one highly significant area is the exercise of policy and legal power over it. The past four or five years have seen the rise of policies, laws and procedures that are essentially repressive of the Internet and contradictory to everything it stands for.
The best known of these attacks is the intrusive blocking of email from users, usually using the pretext of blocking spam, or unwanted bulk email.
I'll defer to the essay on spam written by Jamie McClelland and appearing elsewhere in this book. He lays it out beautifully.
The same approach is evident in the laws around usage, the most recent of these being the attempts by some lawmakers, supported by certain large corporations, to limit Internet access through a system of special fees that would make certain websites more accessible than others.
The privacy issue reveals a particularly nefarious approach by the government to use the Internet for spying. In fact, most of us have no real privacy on the Internet and, if the government wants it, most commercial providers will immediately hand over all records and logs detailing who you are and what you've been doing on the Internet.

The Organic Internet
￼￼Finally, the quest for control is deceptively masked by the hysteria campaign around the Internet and abuse of children, pornography and child-stalking. This is an especially tough one for us. No one would argue that our society shouldn't protect its kids from predatory people and influences. These things are poisonous.
They are, however, lurking in every crevice of this society. They show themselves in virtually every aspect of popular culture. They are the dirty secret of American family life (a high percentage of child abuse occurs within the household). They plunge their poison into personal relationships of all kinds. They are there because our society is crippled by its vision of how people should relate to each other and how adults should relate to children.
Attempts to regulate the Internet to protect kids aren't pernicious in and of themselves. They can actually be productive. But those who seek to regulate Internet content with sweeping laws banning content aren't seeking to protect kids; they're trying to control the Internet.
Not one study has demonstrated that the Internet has expanded the abuse of kids in any way. While the advocates of Internet control scream about how dangerous it is, there is nothing to show that it is any more or less dangerous than streets, schools, or homes for that matter.
You can't be physically abused on the Internet, because the interaction isn't physical. Predators posing as children aren't harmful as long as they are on the Internet, because kids don't know they're adults. While it is certainly possible to abuse people through the Internet, the power imbalance and its resulting harm mainly happens when people attempt to expand their contacts into real life – something that actually seldom happens, and when it does it's an issue, not for lawmakers, but guardians, parents and friends.
No youngster should ever meet another youngster privately as a result of Internet contact. Period. That should be the rule for all households and it remains the primary guard against predatory abuse.
No Internet law can make that happen and none yet proposed would effectively combat predation or abuse of children. But most of those laws would constrict Internet expression so forcefully that many legitimate sites and content producers would be silenced.
The rule of thumb should always be that no law dictating Internet content should ever be passed or enforced.

The Organic Internet
￼￼And there are many lesser known issues lurking beneath the surface including how searching is done, how companies and providers can tag and trace you through the use of "cookies", how access to the Internet itself is handled and curtailed.
The relative lack of outrage about what is happening is probably best explained by the lack of consciousness on people's part about the Internet's character as a world movement and the importance it has to their lives. If progressives are still not clear about that, how can the rest of us be?
The Freedom of Technology
A debate has been raging within the Internet's technologist circles and it's remained hidden from most people, including progressive activists. It's over the use of proprietary software as opposed to free software. Free software is not about being free of charge: it is about being committed to software freedom. It is software that is free to be used in any way, free to be redistributed, free to be examined, and free to be modified, an integral part of the public commons. Free software is at the center of a critical issue for the Internet and the progressive movement.
Elsewhere in this book, Amanda Hickman writes superbly on several aspects of this issue. Her essay should be required reading for every progressive.
The bottom line is that free software is used in virtually every major activity on the Internet. Most common web servers and email servers are free software, as are many web browsers and email programs. Common software tools used to maintain and support the Internet are all built and distributed with freedom as an explicit goal. There are entire operating systems composed of nothing but free software. It just plain makes sense; there is almost nothing that a piece of proprietary software can do that some free tool can't do as well if not better. Free tools are, obviously, affordable to everyone, expandable by programmers when new needs arise and are frequently products of considerable testing and feedback from Internet users worldwide. They carry no onerous restrictions on their use.
What's more, they represent communities that form a centrally important part of the Internet. Viewed organically, a piece of software is a community. It is developed and upgraded by a community of developers and users. It is nurtured, critiqued, evaluated and popularized by a community through email, message boards and website comment systems. It grows with its community or, if that community evaporates, it disappears.

The Organic Internet
￼￼That's true of all software, free or proprietary. Communities formed around free software are unique in an important respect, however. While they are comprised of people of diverse political thinking, their members have in common an implicit belief in collaboration and mass participation – rather than profit and competition – as the driving force behind quality.
These communities not only foster software developed collaboratively, openly and with no restrictions on its distribution, but they have helped thrust free software into the central position in the Internet that it now enjoys.
Which raises an interesting question for the progressive movement: what if an alternative production system, developed collaboratively and nurtured democratically and freely, were to actually become the predominant system in an industry or section of the society or culture? How would the progressive movement evaluate that?
We would call it a victory – one that is virtually unprecedented in our movement's history. It would galvanize us, be a model for further struggles, become the subject of constant evaluation and lesson drawing for us.
Well, with free software, we've done that. We have won this struggle. And what's frustrating is that most activists in most of our movements don't realize it. That so many progressive people continue to use proprietary software, turning our backs on this remarkable victory, underscores this myopia.
But corporations do realize it, and victories can always be reversed. It's hardly surprising as the corporations move to control other aspects of Internet life, they are moving to virtually obliterate free and open source software, or FOSS.
Their tactics are a combination of the cannibalism and urge to hegemony that is stamped into the corporate genes and the use of laws and legal maneuvers that have always been among their primary weapons.
That hegemonic urge is on display in the monopoly strategy that characterizes the history of Microsoft and has been the subject of so much that has been written, said, and even litigated. It's brought into relief in the intrusive attempts by companies like Google to produce software (like its maps or spreadsheets) that are tied to its own corporate growth and would, effectively, capture and eventually limit the experience of Internet participants. It's highlighted by spasms of lawsuits, cases, threats, use of copyright and patent laws – the legal arsenal of corporations desperate to hang on to their market share and, they hope, increase it by eliminating or curtailing free software projects.

The Organic Internet
￼￼The challenge here is to protect free software, fight off any attempts to curtail it, use it, educate people about the importance of using it and participate in its impressive array of communities.
But that can only happen if the progressive movement realizes how important free software is and makes free software one of our priority issues.
The "Techie" as Leader
Among the most difficult Internet issues for the progressive movement is the role of the technologist.
Techies are the people who deal with the inner workings of networks, including the Internet. They work on and manage its file system architecture, its functions, its programs, the incredibly arcane system of ownership and permissions and all the things that pull all that together. They also deal with the physical nuts and bolts – routers, switches, connections, boxes (what normal people call computers). They are equally adept with a line of code and a screen of indecipherable status reports as they are with a screwdriver and a pair of pliers.
Clearly, these are not normal people. Most of us drive the Internet car, fully confident that it will start, stop, turn and idle pleasantly. Techies keep the motor working.
Hence the techie's plight. People rely on the Internet and expect it to function. In fact, we are often miffed when something doesn't work right. Most of us have no idea how close to a miracle it is that this fragile, incrementally developed system actually works. We tend to view a system problem as something that should never happen. When it does, we turn to the techie to fix it, often with impatience and sometimes with borderline hysteria.
And people seriously disrespect techies. They disrespect techies when seeking technical support in a screaming fit. They do it when a technologist graciously offers an explanation of a problem – how many people reading this have said "I don't care what's wrong, just fix it." And they disrespect techies when nothing is wrong and they can conveniently turn their attention to the Internet's explosive potential, completely forgetting about the men and women who make it possible.
If anything demonstrates this "invisible techie syndrome," it's what happened when the Internet industry collapsed a few years ago. Media stories abounded about investors' lost money, owners' lost dreams, communities' lost revenue sources, even people's lost email, but very little was written or said about the single greatest casualty: techies' lost jobs.

The Organic Internet
￼￼By some accounts, nearly 70 percent of all technologists in the Internet industry lost their jobs during that collapse as the workforce was cut down and many jobs shipped overseas to cheaper and more malleable labor markets.
Most of these people were left with no pensions, no severance packages, no health care, not even a months' notice. Their years of training and work were repaid only with the specter of shattered lives. And we lost a major weapon in the fight to protect and expand the Internet: the fact that an army of young workers in this country actually ran it.
We blew it, and we blew it out of a combination of ignorance, inflexibility and classist attitudes.
When the bottom fell out, most of the social justice movement was still blinking at the Internet in wonderment, like a child mesmerized by a toy display. We were trying to figure out how to use it, or if it was even useful at all. In the confusing mosaic, we couldn't see techies.
Perhaps there is a class attitude at work, because techies are the most physical and nuts and bolts of Internet people. They are our mechanics, our machinists, our repair people, and we all know how little respect these people get for the professionalism, skill, talent and commitment required to do their jobs. It's harder to pin down and harder to get people to admit to, but I think that classist attitude is part of the problem for our movements, including the labor movement.
All of which makes it difficult for us to accept the obvious: techies are today the leaders of one of the largest movements in the world.
This is probably the most difficult concept for progressive activists to understand. We have no problem understanding and identifying grassroots leadership. We can easily recognize a mass movement leader when we see one. We know, almost instinctively, who to speak with when we wish to work with or support a movement we recognize.
But this is different because this movement, which is technology-based, is completely unlike any we've dealt with before. The traditional leader's tools – public speaking, writing, face-to-face convincing, meeting and event organizing – are, while certainly present in many techies, not their most important leadership tools. Rather, their tools are the awesome expertise they have over technology.
Still, the basic criteria we use for leadership identification are all there. What does a leader do?

The Organic Internet
￼￼Identify an issue or need, usually from his or her own life. Identify who else is affected by it. Start involving other people and getting them to involve other similarly affected people. And then have meetings, events and exchanges that discuss the issue and what to do about it.
That scenario, replayed in some form over and over throughout our history, is precisely how the Internet organizes and grows. It is, in fact, the history of the Internet.
Drawing on his or her experience as a user and countless communications with other users through email lists and message boards and simply providing support to users, the techie identifies some need. It could be a protocol improvement, an enhancement of a tool, a new way to approach infrastructure, or something less dramatic like a fix or upgrade or slight modification. No matter what, the techie's role is to define it.
The techie then figures out who's affected and will usually do this by posing questions or suggestions on one of the many email lists or message boards techies frequent. Collaboration immediately kicks in.
Creating that tool, the techie then beta tests it, involving a select group of people and quickly enhancing the collaboration. And those who are testing begin involving others – often by using the new creation to communicate with them. And then, when all that's done, they launch it and people use it to do something about the need that's been identified.
Yes, it is totally different from anything we've seen. But the criteria fit perfectly. Techies are organizers.
And so, here's the question: why does a movement whose organizations are often content and even elated by the participation of a few thousand people in a campaign or action around an issue not recognize the leadership of people who organize and lead 1.3 billion people?
Do we want to win or not? Isn't our goal to get people to work together? Because techies have figured out a way of getting a fifth of humanity to do just that. That is not something we can ignore.
Without the incorporation and participation of sizable numbers of technologists, progressives will not be able to organize the Internet.

Part III – A Strategy for Internet Organizing
With those primary issues identified, our movement's responsibility is to develop a strategy to progressively organize around them.

The Organic Internet
￼￼This work can't be done by one person or even a select group of people – the Internet itself must set this path – but our movement can work to focus Internet users in specific directions to help lead the focusing of the upcoming debate.
New Directions in Technology
For many of the reasons mentioned above, and many more, it is essential that the progressive movement begin an organized and coordinated effort to develop new protocols that guide the Internet in a more productive and progressive way. There are some protocols that seem particularly important:
• We need an alternative to the traditional email that has been around for over 20 years and whose weaknesses are exposed by the spam and security issues.
• We need an alternative "presence" tool or protocol that provides entire organizations and communities with the ability to project, act and interact with other such groups more efficiently than the web now permits.
• We need tools that join the personal or "local" digital experience (what you do on your own computer) with the Internet experience, thereby providing a more seamless relationship between personal and social experiences.
• We need protocols that, while using the domain name system, provide some independence from its constraints, providing us a method of self-identification that is consistent (away from the dynamic IP system), not tied to others (through a domain) and flexible enough for us to incorporate the powers of other protocols and tools (like audio/video communications).
The Access Issue
The curtailed access on the part of poor people, people of color and women to the technological leadership of the Internet effectively enslaves these people to the choices and judgments of groups of men, deepening the sexism and racism prominent in our society rather than working to combat it.
Since the Social Justice movement – where women and people of color play a central leadership role – has had stunning success in dealing with this issue, it's well positioned to work for these changes in the Internet.

The Organic Internet
￼￼There are many training programs for people but they all train people as users. What is needed is a huge, national training program – run by Internet techies – to specifically train people from the excluded groups to develop their real technological skills and a consciousness of themselves as organizers and with a commitment that these trainings will actually turn into working groups of technologists.
The Techie/Social Justice Movement Collaboration
The model for the treatment of techies by the Social Justice movement is atrocious and reflects our movement's inability to really see the Internet as it is.
Techies clearly have much valuable political and strategic thinking combined with the technological ability to put that thinking into organizing practice. In the appropriate atmosphere, their potential contribution to our movement is immense.
At the same time, it is important for our movement to understand the development of Internet technology – that mass collaborative experience – as organizing work.
Our goal should be two-fold:
• Techies should be involved as the organizers they are in all discussions and activities of all progressive organizations – not just technology-related activities.
• All projects to develop new Internet technology should involve non- techie progressive activists and organizers.
Software Should Be Free
No progressive organization should choose proprietary software over free software for anything. There's a stable, effective, free option for virtually every task you do on a computer, particularly on the Internet. If we can't find free software for a particular task, we should organize to develop it.
Additionally, we must resist any attempt by corporations to impinge on the free software movement, for any reason, including copyright or patent infringement. Using commercial laws to repress the development and use of free software is an obscene slap in the face of the Internet's culture and spirit and, in the end, damages its current functioning and its future.
Content Should Be Free
If we trust humanity to build a better world, we can trust humanity to make choices about what content is good and what's not worth the time, what's productive and what's damaging. We don't need our governments or authorities to make those choices for us.

The Organic Internet
￼￼All attempts to legally regulate content online should be viewed with great suspicion and, in most cases, met with sharp opposition. While there may be cases in which regulation might be acceptable, I have yet to see one identified.
To allow governments to regulate the Internet is to destroy its primary reason for being; that will quickly destroy the Internet movement itself.
Internet freedom is freedom of content.
Keep Power Over Email
You have a right to receive every single piece of email sent to you, and this is a right we must never give up. To give it up is to put the power over our communications in the hands of some company or small group of people.
The struggle over spam-blocking isn't a debate over how to handle spam; it's a debate over who has the right to make choices about an individual's communications.
We have plenty of spam identification software to help us flag spam. Even if you decide to automatically send all spam-flagged emails to the trash without looking at them, you are still exercising your right and power.
But once someone else determines that something they think is spam should never get to us, we've lost that critical power, and that's an invitation to censorship and repression. To not see that as a potential disaster is to stick your head in the sand.
A progressive demands that his or her provider deliver all email. If that demand isn't met, change providers and let them know why. There are more than a few providers who understand the dangers of spam-blocking.
(For an understanding of this complex issue, I again refer readers to Jamie McClelland's article on email.)
The Internet User's Bill of Rights
One idea worth considering in the face of attacks on the Internet is an Internet User's Bill of Rights. There are already several versions of such a document circulating on the Internet. I think a Bill of Rights that could be useful for organizing the Internet would summarize some of the issues I've mentioned above. For example:
• The right to receive every email sent to you
• The right to publish freely and on equal basis any website material
• The right to full access to the Internet
• The right to adequate and timely technical support

The Organic Internet
￼￼• The right to move and manage your own domain easily and transparently
This is certainly not a final version. It's just a few points I think progressives should be discussing for incorporation into a Bill of Rights.

Summing Up
For activists, there's no question the Internet is important. The real question is what's important about it.
We could continue as we are doing: using technology to reach out to people; to present information and our perspectives and to organize people around the issues we consider important.
Nobody would seriously argue that we should abandon using the Internet to organize around important issues. That would be foolish and a huge step backwards for progressive activists and movements.
That's why it's important to understand that the Internet is organic. Organic things aren't static; they move and change and progress. As the Internet evolves, somebody will lead and influence that evolution. Simply continuing with our present "just use the Internet" approach will ensure that the ruling classes, corporations and governments of the world will be able to define the evolution of the Internet to meet their needs and not those of the the majority of humanity.
They understand the Internet's organic nature and how important influencing and controlling it is. There is simply no way that those who oppose real social change, value profits over people, and see communications as a way of influencing and controlling people are going to accept a fifth of the human race communicating across every conceivable boundary. They have to control it and mold it.
They are doing that right now and we are the people conscious of that fact and able to take them on. Our experience has taught us how they operate and what they want and how to stop them.
That's the challenge, and there's an additional benefit in answering it. We are organizing the most important eruption of human resistance in history. As we work on its issues, it will naturally become more conscious of our issues – the ones we work on every day. They will see those connections because they are real. The struggle for an open, truthful and productive Internet is linked intrinsically to the struggle for freedom of expression and the just world that follows logically from it.

The Organic Internet
￼￼There's no blueprint for what to do. That will arise from the practical work and discussions people have all over the world. The only thing that's clear right now is that the work and those discussions have to start immediately and never stop until we all live in the kind of world we all deserve.
